In JavaScript, the execution context is an abstract concept that holds information about the environment within which the current code is being executed. There are three main types of execution contexts:

Global Execution Context:

Created when the JavaScript engine first starts to execute the code.
There is only one global execution context in the program.
It contains the global object (window in browsers, global in Node.js) and the this keyword refers to this global object.

Function Execution Context:

Created whenever a function is invoked.
There can be multiple function execution contexts, each associated with a function call.
It contains the arguments passed to the function, the function's local variables, and the value of this within the function scope.

  
Eval Execution Context:

Created when the eval() function is invoked.
It has access to the current scope and can modify the outer context.
Each execution context has two stages:




Creation Phase:

Global Execution Context:

The global object and this are created.
Outer environment reference is set to null.
Memory is allocated for functions and variables (hoisting).
Function Execution Context:
arguments object is created, containing all arguments passed to the function.
this value is determined.
Memory is allocated for local variables and inner functions (hoisting).

Execution Phase:

Code is executed line by line.
Variables are assigned values and functions are executed.
Components of Execution Context

Variable Object (VO):

Contains function arguments, inner variable and function declarations.
In the global context, this is the global object.
Scope Chain:

Consists of the current execution context’s Variable Object and the variable objects of all its parent execution contexts.
Determines the scope of variables and functions accessible from a particular part of the code.
this Keyword:

Refers to an object that depends on how the function is called (e.g., in the global context, it refers to the global object).
